well this talk once around hot Jupiters
is part of a set of talks that are aimed
at the Cambridge young astronomers Group
which we're holding this weekend here in
Cambridge and uh it's part of talking
about exoplanets and planets around
other stars and how we have located them
in general so let's get going with uh
this
one our solar system consists of two
classes of planets
small rocky planets and large gas giants
these are images that I've taken with my
telescope here at home in the backyard
it's a 14in Schmid
cigra telescope uh with a webcam
attached in place of the eyepiece and it
manages to produce these images after
making a video and stacking the the
results along the top row we've got
Mercury Venus and Mars of course we
don't have a picture of the Earth and we
have Jupiter Saturn Uranus and Neptune
along the bottom row getting smaller
because they're further away and uh
obviously the latter two it's really on
the limit of what I'm able to photograph
with this technology as a green and blue
little disc but the pictures of the
other planets are really quite good
except Mercury Mercury at the top left
there suffers from always being very
very low in the sky and so you're
looking through a lot lot of low thick
Air at a tangent across the Horizon and
there's a lot of dirt and dust in the
way and so on but anyway the point is we
have these two classes of planets the
inner planets that are small and Rocky
and the outer planets that are large and
mostly made of
gas and a map of the solar system here
not to scale shows that we've got the
four inner planets Mercury Venus Earth
and Mars of course there's that the moon
of the Earth and a couple of moons of
Mars then we have the asteroid belt lots
of small rocky and icy bodies there and
then we have the gas giants and then the
ker belt a second asteroid belt made out
of small dwarf planets and other um
objects before we then go on into much
deeper space where comets and things
come from that's another
story but if we were to uh try to
understand how these planets came to be
they began
in the early days 4 and a half thousand
million years ago with the sun forming
in the center of a large spinning disc
of gas and dust and most of the material
99 something perc ended up in the sun
and the remaining fraction ended up in
the planets in the dis and the leftover
bits forming the asteroids and the
comets and so
forth there's a little bit of dust left
in the zodiacal light as well that we
see just a thin layer of dust through
the solar
system but the planets picked up a lot
of that dust as they orbited round
through this much denser cloud of
material in the uh original time then
they
would grow by attracting more dust with
their gravity and then as they got
bigger pulling in more dust and the more
massive they got the more they were able
to pull in material
but it depended on what material was
where in the solar system and again if
we have a look at our planets they are
in these two classes the rocky worlds
and the gas giants and we think that the
differentiation between them is that the
rocky material the silicates and the
metals of their cores the iron and
nickel cores and so forth that's all
very tough nonvolatile material and so
it could withstand the heat of the sun
forming in the center sudden outpourings
of Heat and the lighter gaseous material
the hydrogen the helium methane ammonia
water all of those sorts of uh materials
that we normally think of as gases or
liquids would have been blasted and
boiled away from the inner part of the
solar system and ended up accumulating
in the outer colder regions much further
away from the Sun
and in fact we would describe that as
having been beyond the frost line if you
go far enough out roughly somewhere
around the asteroid belt you reached a
point where depending on exactly how hot
the sun was as it grew and evolved you
would have had this position where these
different uh lightweight materials could
condense out and the lighter materials
would condense less well and be need to
be having colder temperatures further
away so roughly in the asteroid belt
you'd get to the point where things like
water would condense a little bit
further out maybe ammonia further out
still things like methane um and the
hydrogen and helium of course has
remained largely gaseous but was driven
away from the inner part of the solar
system by the Heat and so we've ended up
with this sort of model of our solar
system with the enormous mass of the Sun
in the center very very hot indeed
pouring energy out and they other uh
baked worlds of Mercury Venus Earth Mars
and series there in the asteroid
belt gradually getting less dense as
they go out Mars and series are
significantly less dense than the uh
inner three planets probably because
more of that water ice was able to
accumulate compared to the amount of
iron and rock and so uh it's quite
possible that this is a gradation and
then we really have crossed the frost
line because suddenly further out all of
the uh lightweight materials were able
to begin condensing and once they
started condensing they would grow a
much larger planet and then the much
larger planet with its gravity would be
able to pull in a huge envelope of gas
out of that initial dust and so we can
see the gas giants and then we've got
the leftover bits and pieces that got
kicked out of that region into the koer
belt where Pluto and its Moon Sharon and
the other members of the koer belt are
further out so going on with the story
then we have attempted to discover
planets around other stars in various
different ways one of the most
successful has been the Kepler space
telescope Mission looking for planets
passing in front of the line of sight
from Earth to their star and causing a
drop in the light a so-called Transit
event and it's through that dimition of
the staright that we are able to
reliably detect that these planets are
there we can even estimate how large
they are in comparison to the Sun and if
we see that this multiple times we can
work out their orbital period and uh
from that we can begin to work out how
massive the sun is or the star in the
center is by Kepler's laws and so we can
begin to get a handle on them now the
amazing thing that happened during the
very early days of detecting these
exoplanets that surprised everyone was
that the first planets that we found
were huge giant planets some of them
many times larger than Jupiter orbiting
much closer to the star and I mean close
they were inside the orbit of mercury
even taking just a few a perhaps in some
cases to hurtle around the interior
orbits very very close to the stars and
with enormously high surface
temperatures or atmospheric
temperatures there's one here Kepler
13ab uh this is an a a super Jupiter
planet and some of them were well
larger the
uh structure of our solar system seemed
to be nothing like what we were
originally finding and the question
really is how did these enormous gas
giants manage to form or managed to
exist so close to their Stars they must
have and they must still look like
comets almost hurtling around the star
the temperature being so ferocious that
uh a lot of material must be boiling
away from them and so they can't have
been there for very long because if
they'd been there 4 and a half billion
years and in the age of our solar system
the heat at that distance would have
boiled all the uh lightweight Material
off way too hot for those gases to
persist so it's unlikely that they've
been there a long time and it's
therefore unlikely they actually formed
there in the first place again the
volatile materials would have been
driven away so it just does not make
sense for them to have been created in
that position or indeed been there for
very long now we've been able to trace
is many of these hot Jupiter worlds
taking these very close passes past
Their Stars some of them are on very
very elliptical orbits there's an
example here the star
hd96 167 has a Planet B that is on a
long orbit that is very elliptical that
would take it out to what would be the
asteroid belt in our solar system and
then dive through down to to be as close
as mercury as it gets to the uh
perihelion the sun approach or the star
approach the per asterism in this
case
so quite quite different to the
organization that we have now we have
found a tremendous range of planets
these days from ones that are many times
larger than Jupiter to even smaller
planets than the earth and this is just
just an artist's impression of many of
them to give you a sort of idea of what
we're finding so there are sort of
Jupiter's and super Jupiters there are
Neptune and Saturn like planets U some
of them even have rings there are none
on this picture that show rings but
that's just an artist drawing anyway and
then we have super Earths bigger than
the earth perhaps ocean worlds down
through rocky planets and down to subar
category planets even these
days so how did the super Jupiters end
up so close to their Stars these hot
Jupiter planets well we think that
during that early stage of the system
formation the solar system formation you
would have had the Proto star in the
center with this dust disc out of which
the planets were accreting and grabbing
material and growing bigger but as they
do so they're plowing through this lay
of material and it acts like a friction
break and causes them to slowly spiral
in of course that's great because every
time they spiral in a bit they find new
fresh material to accumulate so they
would just gradually sweep inwards
clearing a great sthe of the uh disc by
absorbing the material into themselves
but this inward spiral would be bad if
you were a another small planet trying
to orbit round in that region and a
giant came kening in from the outer part
of the solar system but it seems likely
that this is what happened and that the
addition of dust caused them to move in
now in our solar system we think Jupiter
and Saturn both spiraled inwards towards
the sun picking up gas and dust as they
went but that the disc was thin enough
that they used all the material that was
a ailable either absorbing it or kicking
it into the Sun or throwing it out of
the solar system completely with a
gravitational slingshot and they reached
a point where they
stopped and and that's in their current
orbits relatively quickly perhaps in 50
or 100 million years they would have
swept inwards and stopped in these
positions now that inward movement would
have disrupted the orbits of any smaller
planets and in particular disrupted
the body that was attempting to
form in where we now see the asteroid
belt what would have been Planet 5 never
got a chance to stabilize and merge into
one single body because Jupiter kept
encroaching inwards on it from the
outside hoovering up the material that
was available and also causing the
orbits of any bodies that were just
interior to it to get disrupted and
again I hurled out of the solar system
hurled into the sun merged with Jupiter
or collide with each other very
violently um and end up not being able
to coales together to form a fifth
planet so it sort of explains a couple
of things all in one go here it even
explains the possibility that we had a
very heavy bombardment of asteroid
material coming in from this region
disturbed by Jupiter and hurled around
the solar system bombarding the inner
planets the Earth and the moon and
creating all those craters that we now
see on the moon in the very early time
with lots and lots of asteroid space
rocks smashing into the Moon called the
late heavy bombardment just a few
hundred million years into the life of
the solar
system but of course there is another
factor and that is that when we are
searching for planets no matter how
we're doing it whether it's looking for
transits or directly Imaging them or
looking at the Doppler effect light
shift that they apply to their host star
or just plainly looking at the movement
they cause to their home star any of
those ways of finding them it's so much
easier to find a big planet because it
is either brighter or it causes more
gravitational wobble in the parent star
um or it blocks more of the star light
if it comes in front as a Transit any
effect that we're using direct or
indirect works better for Big Planets
than small ones and it also works better
for planets near the star better than
ones that are further away the nearer
you are the greater the gravitational
force will be so the more influence a
planet will have on its star in terms of
inducing a wobble and they both would
orbit the center of mass and that is
more effective if you're closer in but
it also happens more rapidly because
your orbit will be shorter and if we're
looking for transits then the planet
will transit in front of the parent star
so much more often so generally there is
a massive bias towards finding large
planets that are in close in orbits and
so of course it was natural that what we
found first was these hot Jupiter world
large planets orbiting very close to
their Stars either creating a large
wobble or a very rapid repeat of Transit
events if there are more events it's so
much easier to find them and identify
them so perhaps if we thought about it
properly we really shouldn't have been
quite so surprised to find quite so many
of these hot Jupiter planets out there
now the distribution of planets that
we've been finding since the techniques
have been getting better are still
biased towards the Big Planets close in
um but we are getting much greater
spread now and our solar system is
beginning to look a little bit less
unusual um and that's probably a nice
thing if you're thinking about the
possibility of habitable worlds beyond
the Sun so with that I'll leave it there
thank you very much for listening and I
hope you've enjoyed it